Migrating 30 million rows from DB2 to Oracle is a significant task, especially given the complexities you’ve outlined: schema changes, data mapping differences, business logic filtering, and the need for join queries across multiple tables. Let’s break this down systematically to evaluate the best solutions, assess the feasibility of a Spring Boot API or batch with a 2GB JVM, and compare Golang, Python, and custom ETL tools like AWS Glue. I’ll also address your and your colleague’s suggestions to provide a clear recommendation.
Problem Breakdown
Scale: 30 million rows is a large dataset, requiring efficient processing to avoid memory issues and ensure reasonable performance.

Complexity:
Schema Changes: The DB2 and Oracle schemas differ, so direct table-to-table migration isn’t possible.

Data Mapping: Columns in DB2 need to be transformed to match Oracle’s schema.

Business Logic: Rows are migrated only if they satisfy specific business rules.

Join Queries: Business logic requires checking values across multiple tables, meaning complex SQL queries with joins.

Performance Requirements: The migration must be efficient, resumable (in case of failures), and capable of handling large datasets without crashing.

One-Off vs. Recurring: You mentioned this is a one-off or low-frequency migration, not a productized ETL, which influences the choice of tools.

Team Preferences: You suggest Golang for its performance and control, while your colleague suggests Python for its ease of use and rapid development.

Step 1: Assess the Spring Boot API/Batch Solution with 2GB JVM
Feasibility of Spring Boot with 2GB JVM
Spring Boot is a popular framework for building Java applications, and it can be used for data migration via a batch process (e.g., using Spring Batch). However, there are several considerations:
Memory Constraints (2GB JVM):
Heap Memory: A 2GB JVM heap is relatively small for processing 30 million rows, especially if you load large batches into memory. Each row’s size depends on the number and type of columns, but let’s estimate:
Assume each row averages 1KB (a rough estimate for a row with several columns, including strings and numbers).

30 million rows × 1KB = 30GB of raw data.

If you process in batches (e.g., 10,000 rows at a time), that’s 10MB per batch, which fits in memory. However, Spring Batch, Hibernate (if used), and the JVM itself add overhead (e.g., object creation, garbage collection).

Garbage Collection (GC) Overhead: With a 2GB heap, frequent GC cycles may occur if you load large datasets, leading to performance degradation.

Risk of OutOfMemoryError: If you accidentally load too many rows or if joins result in large intermediate result sets, you risk an OutOfMemoryError.

Spring Batch for Migration:
Pros:
Spring Batch is designed for batch processing and provides features like chunk-based processing, retry mechanisms, and restartability.

You can configure a JdbcCursorItemReader to stream rows from DB2 (avoiding loading all rows into memory) and a JdbcBatchItemWriter to write to Oracle.

Supports transaction management and error handling.

Cons:
Memory Usage: Spring Batch’s default settings might still load more data into memory than necessary, especially with joins. You’d need to carefully configure the chunk size and use cursor-based reading.

Performance: Java’s memory management and Spring’s overhead (e.g., dependency injection, ORM if using Hibernate) can make it slower than a lightweight solution like Golang.

Join Queries: If your business logic requires complex joins, you might need to write custom SQL or use an ORM (e.g., Hibernate), which can add overhead and complexity.

API vs. Batch:
API: Building a Spring Boot API for migration is not ideal. APIs are designed for real-time request/response interactions, not for processing 30 million rows in a single run. You’d face issues with timeouts, memory, and scalability.

Batch: Spring Batch is a better fit, as it’s designed for large-scale data processing. However, with a 2GB JVM, you’d need to:
Use a small chunk size (e.g., 1000 rows) to avoid memory issues.

Stream data using JdbcCursorItemReader instead of loading entire result sets.

Disable Hibernate (if used) and use raw JDBC to reduce overhead.

Conclusion on Spring Boot:
A Spring Boot batch job with a 2GB JVM is feasible but not optimal:
You’ll need to carefully tune the chunk size, use streaming, and avoid ORMs to stay within the 2GB limit.

Performance may be slower compared to a lightweight language like Golang due to Java’s memory overhead and GC.

Complex joins and business logic might lead to memory spikes, especially if intermediate result sets are large.

If you increase the JVM heap (e.g., to 8GB or more), Spring Batch becomes more viable, but you’ll still face performance trade-offs compared to Golang.

Step 2: Evaluate Golang, Python, and AWS Glue
1. Golang
You suggested Golang, and I agree it’s a strong candidate for this migration. Here’s why:
Pros:
High Performance: Golang is compiled to machine code, offering excellent performance with minimal memory overhead. It’s much lighter than Java, making it ideal for processing 30 million rows.

Concurrency: Golang’s goroutines and channels make it easy to implement a worker pool for concurrent processing, allowing you to process multiple batches in parallel efficiently.

Memory Efficiency: Golang has a smaller memory footprint than Java. You can process large datasets without worrying about GC overhead or memory constraints.

Control: Golang gives you full control over database connections (e.g., using database/sql with connection pooling), SQL queries, and data transformations.

Resumability: You can easily implement checkpointing (e.g., tracking the last successful ID) to make the migration resumable.

Structured Logging: Libraries like go.uber.org/zap provide fast, structured logging for monitoring.

Containerization: Golang binaries are standalone and easy to containerize (e.g., with Docker), making deployment straightforward.

Cons:
Learning Curve: If your team is less familiar with Golang, there might be a learning curve compared to Python.

Verbosity: Golang can be more verbose than Python for certain tasks (e.g., error handling).

Suitability for Your Case:
Complex Business Logic: Golang handles complex logic well. You can write modular code to parse, transform, validate, and migrate data.

Joins: You can write efficient SQL queries with joins using database/sql and prepared statements.

Performance: Golang can handle 30 million rows efficiently, even with a worker pool processing batches concurrently.

Memory: Golang’s memory usage is much lower than Java’s, so you won’t face the same memory constraints as with a 2GB JVM.

2. Python
Your colleague suggested Python, which is a popular choice for data migration due to its ease of use.
Pros:
Ease of Development: Python is easy to learn and write, with a large ecosystem of libraries (e.g., pandas, sqlalchemy, psycopg2 for DB2/Oracle).

Rapid Prototyping: Python is great for prototyping and experimenting with business logic, especially for complex transformations.

Libraries for Data Processing: Libraries like pandas can simplify data mapping and transformation, especially for joins and filtering.

Community Support: Python has a large community and extensive documentation.

Cons:
Performance: Python is an interpreted language and significantly slower than Golang or Java for large-scale data processing. Processing 30 million rows with complex joins might take much longer.

Memory Usage: Python (especially with pandas) can be memory-intensive. Loading large datasets into memory (e.g., as a DataFrame) might lead to memory issues, similar to or worse than Java.

Concurrency: Python’s Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) makes true concurrency difficult. While you can use multiprocessing for parallelism, it’s less efficient than Golang’s goroutines.

Error Handling: Python’s dynamic typing can lead to runtime errors that might be caught later in the migration process.

Suitability for Your Case:
Complex Business Logic: Python excels here due to its readability and libraries like pandas for data manipulation.

Joins: You can use pandas to perform joins in memory, but this requires loading large datasets, which might not be feasible for 30 million rows.

Performance: Python will likely be the slowest option, especially for a one-off migration where performance is critical.

Memory: Python might struggle with memory if you load large datasets, unless you process rows in a streaming fashion (e.g., using sqlalchemy with raw SQL).

3. Custom ETL Tool (AWS Glue)
AWS Glue is a managed ETL service that can handle data migrations between databases.
Pros:
Managed Service: AWS Glue handles infrastructure, scaling, and monitoring, reducing operational overhead.

Built for ETL: Glue is designed for data migration, with support for schema discovery, data mapping, and transformations.

Scalability: Glue automatically scales to handle large datasets like 30 million rows.

Integration: Glue integrates with AWS services (e.g., S3 for intermediate storage, CloudWatch for monitoring).

Resumability: Glue jobs can be configured to resume from failures using bookmarks.

Cons:
Complex Business Logic: Glue uses Python (PySpark) for transformations, but implementing complex business logic (especially with joins across multiple tables) can be cumbersome compared to writing custom code in Golang.

Cost: Glue can be expensive for a one-off migration, especially if you need to run multiple jobs to handle the complexity.

Learning Curve: If your team isn’t familiar with AWS Glue, there’s a learning curve to set up connections, write transformation scripts, and debug issues.

Performance: Glue’s performance depends on the underlying Spark cluster. For a one-off migration with complex logic, it might be slower than a custom Golang solution.

Suitability for Your Case:
Complex Business Logic: Glue can handle this, but you’ll need to write PySpark scripts, which might be less flexible than Golang for custom logic.

Joins: Glue supports joins, but they’re processed in a distributed Spark environment, which might add overhead for a one-off migration.

Performance: Glue is optimized for large-scale ETL, but the overhead of Spark might make it slower than a custom Golang solution for a one-off task.

Cost: If cost is a concern, a custom solution might be more economical for a one-off migration.

Step 3: Reassess the Decision
Given the complexities (schema changes, data mapping, business logic, joins), let’s reassess the decision:
Not a Simple Migration:
This isn’t a straightforward table-to-table migration. The need for schema changes, data mapping, business logic, and joins makes a custom solution more appropriate than a generic ETL tool like AWS Glue.

AWS Glue is better suited for recurring ETL jobs or simpler migrations where schema mapping is straightforward. For a one-off migration with complex logic, the overhead of setting up Glue and writing PySpark scripts might outweigh the benefits.

Performance and Control:
Performance is critical for a 30 million-row migration. Golang offers the best performance and control, allowing you to optimize batch sizes, concurrency, and memory usage.

Python, while easier to develop, will likely be too slow and memory-intensive for this scale.

Spring Boot with a 2GB JVM is feasible but suboptimal due to memory constraints and performance overhead.

Team Skills:
If your team is comfortable with Golang, it’s the best choice for performance and control.

If your team is more experienced with Python, you can use it, but you’ll need to carefully manage performance and memory (e.g., by streaming data and using multiprocessing).

Step 4: Recommended Solution: Golang
Based on the analysis, I recommend using Golang for this migration, aligning with your suggestion. Here’s why:
Performance: Golang’s compiled nature and lightweight runtime make it ideal for processing 30 million rows efficiently.

Concurrency: Goroutines and channels allow you to process batches concurrently, maximizing throughput.

Memory Efficiency: Golang’s memory footprint is much smaller than Java or Python, avoiding the memory issues you’d face with a 2GB JVM or Python’s pandas.

Control: Golang gives you fine-grained control over database connections, SQL queries, and data transformations.

Resumability: You can easily implement checkpointing to resume the migration in case of failures.

Modularity: Golang’s package system makes it easy to write modular code for parsing, transformation, validation, and migration.

Why Not Python?
While Python is easier to develop, its performance and memory usage make it less suitable for a 30 million-row migration with complex logic and joins. You’d need to stream data carefully (e.g., using sqlalchemy with raw SQL) and use multiprocessing for parallelism, but it will still be slower than Golang.
Why Not AWS Glue?
AWS Glue is overkill for a one-off migration with complex logic. The cost, setup time, and overhead of using PySpark outweigh the benefits compared to a custom Golang solution.
Why Not Spring Boot with 2GB JVM?
Spring Boot is viable but not optimal. The 2GB JVM constraint limits your ability to process large batches, and Java’s overhead (GC, Spring framework) makes it slower than Golang. If you can increase the heap size (e.g., to 8GB), Spring Batch becomes more feasible, but Golang is still a better choice for performance.
Step 5: Golang Implementation Outline
Here’s a high-level outline of how to implement the migration in Golang, addressing all requirements:
Folder Structure:

db2oracle/
├── cmd/
│   └── db2oracle/
│       └── main.go
├── internal/
│   ├── config/        # Configuration loading
│   ├── db/           # Database connections and queries
│   ├── logger/       # Structured logging with Zap
│   ├── migration/    # Migration logic, workers, checkpointing
│   └── output/       # Failed record logging
├── Dockerfile
├── go.mod
└── go.sum

Key Features:
Database Connections: Use database/sql with connection pooling for DB2 and Oracle.

Batching: Process rows in batches (e.g., 10,000 rows) to manage memory.

Concurrency: Use a worker pool with goroutines and channels to process batches in parallel.

Business Logic: Implement filtering logic (e.g., check values across multiple tables using joins).

Checkpointing: Track the last successful ID to resume migration.

Failed Record Logging: Log failed records to a CSV file.

Structured Logging: Use go.uber.org/zap for logging.

Containerization: Include a Dockerfile for deployment.

Sample Code (Simplified):
go

package main

import (
    "database/sql"
    "fmt"
    "strings"
    "sync"

    "go.uber.org/zap"
    _ "github.com/godror/godror" // Oracle driver
    // Replace with actual DB2 driver
)

type Record struct {
    ID    int
    Name  *string
    Email *string
}

func main() {
    // Initialize logger
    log, _ := zap.NewProduction()
    defer log.Sync()

    // Connect to databases
    db2, _ := sql.Open("db2", "db2_dsn")
    oracle, _ := sql.Open("godror", "oracle_dsn")
    defer db2.Close()
    defer oracle.Close()

    // Migration logic
    lastID := 0 // Load from checkpoint
    batchSize := 10000
    concurrency := 4
    recordsChan := make(chan []Record, concurrency)
    var wg sync.WaitGroup

    // Start workers
    for i := 0; i < concurrency; i++ {
        wg.Add(1)
        go func() {
            defer wg.Done()
            for records := range recordsChan {
                for _, r := range records {
                    // Apply business logic with joins
                    if !satisfiesBusinessLogic(db2, r) {
                        continue
                    }
                    // Transform and insert
                    name := ""
                    if r.Name != nil {
                        name = strings.TrimSpace(*r.Name)
                    }
                    email := ""
                    if r.Email != nil {
                        email = strings.TrimSpace(*r.Email)
                    }
                    _, err := oracle.Exec("INSERT INTO target_table (id, name, email) VALUES (?, ?, ?)", r.ID, name, email)
                    if err != nil {
                        log.Error("Failed to insert", zap.Int("id", r.ID), zap.Error(err))
                        continue
                    }
                }
            }
        }()
    }

    // Fetch and process batches
    for {
        rows, err := db2.Query("SELECT id, name, email FROM source_table WHERE id > ? ORDER BY id LIMIT ?", lastID, batchSize)
        if err != nil {
            log.Fatal("Query failed", zap.Error(err))
        }
        var records []Record
        for rows.Next() {
            var r Record
            rows.Scan(&r.ID, &r.Name, &r.Email)
            records = append(records, r)
        }
        rows.Close()
        if len(records) == 0 {
            break
        }
        recordsChan <- records
        lastID = records[len(records)-1].ID
    }
    close(recordsChan)
    wg.Wait()
}

func satisfiesBusinessLogic(db *sql.DB, r Record) bool {
    // Example: Check if the record satisfies business logic with a join
    var count int
    err := db.QueryRow("SELECT COUNT(*) FROM related_table WHERE related_id = ? AND status = 'active'", r.ID).Scan(&count)
    return err == nil && count > 0
}

Performance Tuning:
Batch Size: Start with 10,000 rows per batch and adjust based on performance.

Concurrency: Use 4-8 workers (goroutines) to balance CPU usage and database load.

Connection Pooling: Configure SetMaxOpenConns and SetMaxIdleConns to avoid connection exhaustion.

Step 6: Final Recommendation
Use Golang: It’s the best choice for this migration due to its performance, memory efficiency, and concurrency model. You can build a robust, resumable migration tool that handles 30 million rows efficiently.

Avoid Spring Boot with 2GB JVM: The memory constraint makes it risky, and performance will be suboptimal.

Avoid Python for Production: Use Python for prototyping if needed, but switch to Golang for the final implementation.

Avoid AWS Glue: It’s overkill for a one-off migration with complex logic.

Compromise with Your Colleague
Prototype in Python: If your colleague prefers Python, you can prototype the business logic and joins in Python using pandas and sqlalchemy. This allows rapid iteration.

Implement in Golang: Once the logic is validated, rewrite the migration in Golang for production to ensure performance and scalability.

ATS-Friendly Keywords
Golang: Recommended language for performance.

Spring Boot/Spring Batch: Evaluated for batch processing.

Python: Considered for prototyping.

AWS Glue: Assessed as an ETL tool.

Data Migration: Core task.

Concurrency: Using goroutines in Golang.

Checkpointing: For resumability.

Joins/Business Logic: Handling complex requirements.

Let me know if you’d like a detailed Golang implementation or help with prototyping in Python!